Hello and welcome to this tutorial on
vectorized operations. Today we'll find
out why the square brackets aren't that
important in R and what is the
fundamental underlying concept driving
this whole programming language.
Alright so let's get started. Let's say
we have a numeric vector of 10 elements
and let's say we also have another
numeric vector of 10 elements as well
and our goal is to add these two vectors
together element by element so what we
want to do is we want to add these two
elements together we want to add these
two elements these two these two these
two and so on.
So what would you do if you were
programming this challenge in a
different programming language something
like C or C++ or Java or for that matter
any other programming language that
comes to mind. What you would probably do
is you would create a loop and in that
loop you would have an index variable
which would run from one to ten and in
every iteration of the loop you would
add the corresponding two element so in
the first situation that look you add
these two and put them into the third
vector then on the second iteration
would add these to put them into that
third vector as well then you'd add
these two, the third iteration puts
them into the third vector and so on so
you would actually loop through this and
that is the conventional approach and
it's called the devectorized approach
but in R what you can do is you can
simply just add the two vectors just
simply put the plus sign between them
like we're showing over here just tell
R to add vector A, vector B and it will
do all of that for you in the background
so you don't have to actually loop
through these. All you have to do is tell
R and the two vectors and it will do
it for you and that is the fundamental
underlying principle that R is a
vectorized programming language that
everything happens in vectors already, you
don't need to create these loops. Same
thing for a subtraction operation,
multiplication division even if you want
to compare the two vectors so you want
to perform boolean operations or logical
operations as we call them you can still
do that so you can
compare this vector so vector A, let's
say A greater than B and what will
happen is R will compare element by
element and you'll have a resulting
vector of for instance the first
elements and the resulting vector will
be false.
The second element will be true. It will
be true, it will be false then it will be
true and so on and of course you can
compare the other way
so even boolean operations you can still
perform in a vectorized manner
and moreover as we'll see from the
next tutorial, all these operations you should
perform in a vectorized manner.
Alright so let's see what happens if
hypothetically you tried to add a
smaller vector to a larger vector so you
want to add a vector of five elements to
a vector of 10 elements what will happen
in that case?
Well in that case R will perform
something that is called recycling of
vectors. It will recycle the smaller
vector and the condition here is that
the bigger vector should be a multiple of
the smaller vector so basically the
smaller vector should fit into the
bigger vector a certain number of times
without being cut off and that case
basically R will copy and paste that
small vector the number of times is
required and then we'll add the two
vectors so you should keep that in mind
if you happen to add two vectors or
perform an operation with two vectors of
different lengths and what happens if
the greater vector is not a multiple of
the small vector and you still want to
perform an operation between them? Well
in that case recycling will still occur
but you will get a warning from R. It
will tell you that the greater vector
is not a multiple of the small vector
and that's just something that R wants
you to be aware of to make sure this is
indeed the operation that you wanted to
propose and finally as we saw previously
even with functions you can use vectors
so vectors can be arguments within
functions and also vectors can be
returned from functions performing their
operations. Now bear in mind that start
with all functions are all functions
take the extra argument but a lot of
them actually do and this second note or
hear that
vectors can be returned from functions
if you think of it from a C-type
language or C++ language
perspective it's actually very powerful
thing for those of you who know C and
C++. How much effort do you actually have to
put into your code for your function to
return an array because ultimately an
array is the same thing as a vector in
C&R so you have to go through quite a
lot of hoops for your function to
properly return an array and for
everything to work ok. Here it is very
simple, because the vector is your basic
element is your basic building block of
the programming language which is R
and because R is based on vectors as a
whole that's the doesn't know any other
thing remember that concept that we
talked about that even a single number
is still a vector that's because a
vector is the most elementary building
block of this programming language.
Ok so those were vectorized operations
in R, now you know how they work.
I highly recommend that you take some
time to practice these vectorize
operations to add a few vectors to subtract
them, see what happens with different
lengths of vectors because in the next
tutorial we will jump straight into an
exercise that will show us why exactly
in our vectorize operations are better
and I look forward to seeing you in the
next tutorial,
until then happy coding.